>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SUNDAY, DECEMBER 13...
WHAT THE PARIS CLIMATE CHANGE
DEAL MEANS FOR THE UNITED
STATES.
TRYING TO CONTAIN ISIS BY
ATTEMPTING TO BROKER PEACE IN
LIBYA.
AND, ONE AMERICAN CITY AT THE
CENTER OF THE DEBATE OVER HOW TO
TREAT THE HOMELESS.
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
>>FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS
AT LINCOLN CENTER IN NEWYORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
UNITED NATIONS SECRETARY GENERAL
BAN KI MOON SAYS THE CLIMATE
CHANGE PACT ENDORSED BY CLOSE TO
200 NATIONS IS A TURNING POINT
TO MAKE HUMAN LIFE SUSTAINABLE
ON A HEALTHY PLANET.
WORLD LEADERS ARE WELCOMING THE
AGREEMENT DESIGNED TO CURB
PLANET-POLLUTING CARBON GASES
THAT HAVE BEEN CAUSING A RISE IN
GLOBAL TEMPERATURES.
THE PARIS AGREEMENT APPROVED
YESTERDAY COMMITS COUNTRIES TO
TAKE STEPS THAT COULD CAP THE
RISE IN TEMPERATURES TO NO MORE
THAN TWO DEGREES CELSIUS-- OR
JUST OVER 3.5 DEGREES
FAHRENHEIT-- OVER PRE-INDUSTRIAL
AGE LEVELS.
THE PACT AIMS FOR EVERY COUNTRY
TO REDUCE EMISSIONS FROM BURNING
FOSSIL FUELS IN THE COMING
DECADES SO THE EARTH CAN
NATURALLY ABSORB THEM IN THE
SECOND HALF OF THIS CENTURY.
AND UNDER THE AGREEMENT,
COUNTRIES WILL RE-SUBMIT THEIR
POLLUTION REDUCTION TARGETS TO
THE U.N. EVERY FIVE YEARS.
THE CLIMATE CHANGE AGREEMENT
DOES NOT SPECIFY HOW ITS TERMS
WILL BE ENFORCED, WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN COUNTRIES MISS THEIR
TARGETS, OR HOW MUCH MONEY WILL
BE INVESTED IN CLEAN ENERGY
TECHNOLOGY.
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
ADDRESSED THOSE SHORTCOMINGS ON
"FOX NEWS SUNDAY."
>> IF THERE HAD BEEN A PENALTY,
THERE WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN AN
AGREEMENT.
SO WE DID THE BEST WE COULD TO
SET THE WORLD ON A NEW COURSE
TOWARDS ENERGY INDEPENDENCE,
ALTERNATIVE RENEWABLES, LOWER
CARBON FOOTPRINT.
>> Sreenivasan: JOINING ME NOW
FOR FURTHER ANALYSIS OF THE
CLIMATE CHANGE SUMMIT ACCORD IS
MICHAEL LEVI.
HE IS A SENIOR FELLOW FOR ENERGY
AND THE ENVIRONMENT AT THE
COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS
HERE IN NEW YORK.
>> THE BIG QUESTION IS, WHAT IS
THIS MEAN FOR UNITED STATES?
>> FOR THE UNITED STATES, THIS
MEANS THAT WE ARE DONE WITH 20
YEARS OF FIGHTING OVER THE BASIC
ARCHITECTURE AGREEMENT AND IF WE
FLESH THIS OUT RIGHT WE WILL
HAVE A FRAMEWORK SO WE CAN HAVE
MORE FRAME OF WORK INTO WHAT
OTHER COUNTRIES ARE DOING,
REGULAR PROCESS FOR PRESSING
THEM TO DO MORE, AND SOME
GREATER CERTAINTY ABOUT THE
INTERNATIONAL STRUCTURE THAT WE
ARE WORKING IN.
Sreenivasan: THESE ARE BIG
COMPROMISES MADE FROM A LOT OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES.
WHAT DID THE UNITED STATES WANT
THAT IT DID NOT GET.
JUDGE NO DISTINCTION BETWEEN THE
DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES.
THIS HAS BEEN THE FIGHT FOR
YEARS.
IT WOULD HAVE LIKED EXACTLY THE
SAME LANGUAGE ABOUT OBLIGATION
FOR DEVELOPED AND DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES ON TRANSPARENCY, ON
UPDATING THEY'RE COMMITMENTS,
THE BASIC ELEMENTS OF A DEAL.
THEY GOT A LOT OF THESE
DISTINCTIONS REMOVED BUT THERE
ARE BITS AND PIECES IN THE
AGREEMENT AND THERE WILL BE A
SIGN WE'LL CONTINUE TO FIGHT
OVER THOSE IN THE COMING YEARS.
>> A SCUFFLE OVER THE AGREEMENT,
OVER THE WORD, WHETHER IT SHALL
OR SHOULD, COUNTRIES SHALL OR
SHOULD, MAKE IT'S GONE TOWARDS
SHOULD AND EVERYTHING SEEMS
RATHER VOLUNTARY.
>> ULTIMATELY ALL OF THESE STEPS
ARE VOLUNTEER.
WE SAW IN THE KYOTO PROTOCOL,
COUNTRIES DIDN'T ADHERE TO
ANYHOW.
WE CAN GET OVERLY OBSESSED WITH
SHOULD OR SHALL.
THE CRITICAL DISTINCTION THE
UNITED STATES WAS FOCUSED ON
THERE IS THAT SHALL WOULD HAVE
SENT THE AGREEMENT TO THE SENATE
FOR RATIFICATION WHERE IT WOULD
HAVE DIED AND SHOULD ALLOWS TO
IT ACTUALLY EXIST.
SO BETTER TO HAVE AN AGREEMENT
THAT IS NOT ABSOLUTELY PERFECT
BUT EXISTS BUT ONE THAT YOU LOVE
BUT CAN NEVER SUPPLY.
>> Sreenivasan: SO WHAT ARE THE
COMMITMENTS THAT THE UNITED
STATES HAS TO MAKE, EVEN THOUGH
IT DOESN'T HAVE TO GO TO
CONGRESS?
WILL WE HAVE TO CREATE LAUDS
SAYING, THIS IS HOW WE WILL
DECREASE OUR EMISSIONS?
>> THERE ARE TWO BASIC ELEMENTS
HERE.
FIRST THE UNITED STATES HAS MADE
A PLEDGE TO REDUCE ITS EMISSIONS
26 TO 28% BELOW ITS LEVELS BY
2025.
WITHOUT NEW POLICIES WE ARE NOT
GOING TO GET THERE.
BUT WHETHER THERE NEED TO BE NEW
LAWS OR NEW QUALIFICATIONS UNDER
THE CURRENT LAWS, REMAINS TO BE
SEEN.
OTHER IS THE AGREEMENT IS GOING
TO INCLUDE RULES FOR
TRANSPARENCY, FOR REVIEW OF
COUNTRIES' EFFORTS FOR UPDATING
OF COUNTRIES EFFORTS, THE
DETAILS OF THOSE COULD MEAN A
LOT.
IT COULD BE NOT ONLY CHINA AND
INDIA BUT THE UNITED STATES THAT
IS SCRUTINIZED.
AND THE U.N. REGULATORS ARE
GOING TO TRY TO NAIL THAT DOWN.
>> THIS IS WHAT WE'LL DO AND WE
CAN SEE WHAT EVERYONE ELSE IS
DOING.
>> BETWEEN NOW AND 2025, BETWEEN
NOW AND 2020, WE'LL EXTEND THAT
TO A 2030 GOAL TO ALIGN THAT
WITH OTHER COUNTRIES AND
EVERYONE WILL PARTICIPATE IN
THIS REGULAR FIVE-YEAR PROCESS.
WHAT WORKED IN THE PAST YEAR WAS
THE SPOTLIGHT PARIS SHOWN TO GET
COUNTRIES TO WORK ON SERIOUS
POLICIES THAT COULD REDUCE
EMISSIONS.
AND THE HOPE IS THAt YOU DO
THAT EVERY FIVE YEARS YOU CAN
MOBILIZE THAT SAME KIND OF
POLITICAL FOCUS.
THE FUNDAMENTAL THING HERE, THIS
IS NOT A TECHNICAL LEGAL EFFORT,
IT'S ABOUT DRIVING BETTER
POLITICS THAT ENABLE BETTER
POLICY ON CLIMATE CHANGE.
>> MICHAEL LEVI, THANK YOU VERY
MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> Sreenivasan: FOLLOWING AN
OUTBREAK OF VIOLENCE, THE U.S.
STATE DEPARTMENT HAS ORDERED ALL
NON-EMERGENCY PERSONNEL AND
DEPENDENTS OF GOVERNMENT
EMPLOYEES TO LEAVE THE CENTRAL
AFRICAN COUNTRY OF BURUNDI.
OPPOSITION ATTACKS ON THREE ARMY
POSTS FRIDAY KILLED AROUND 90
PEOPLE, MOSTLY ARMED RESISTANCE
FIGHTERS, ACCORDING TO THE ARMY.
THE ASSOCIATED PRESS REPORTS
AFTER THE ATTACKS, ARMY FORCES
DRAGGED SOME MEN FROM THEIR
HOMES AND SHOT THEM IN THE
STREETS.
UNREST BEGAN EARLIER THIS YEAR
WHEN BURUNDI'S PRESIDENT, PIERRE
NKURUNZIZA SOUGHT AND WON A
THIRD TERM.
MORE 200,000 PEOPLE HAVE FLED
THE COUNTRY.
RUSSIAN AUTHORITIES ARE
INVESTIGATING THE CAUSE OF A
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL FIRE THAT
KILLED 23 PATIENTS LAST NIGHT IN
A VILLAGE IN SOUTHERN RUSSIA.
THE FIRE BROKE OUT AROUND
MIDNIGHT, AND IT TOOK
FIREFIGHTERS THREE HOURS TO
CONTROL IT.
MOST OF THE PATIENTS WHO DIED
WERE ELDERLY AND ASLEEP IN THEIR
BEDS.
TWO DOZEN MORE WERE TREATED FOR
SMOKE INHALATION OR BURNS.
WIKILEAKS FOUNDER JULIAN ASSANGE
WILL FINALLY BE QUESTIONED BY
SWEDISH PROSECUTORS ABOUT RAPE
CHARGES BROUGHT AGAINST HIM IN
2012.
THE INTERVIEW WILL OCCUR INSIDE
ECUADOR'S EMBASSY IN LONDON,
WHERE ASSANGE HAS BEEN LIVING
UNDER A GRANT OF POLITICAL
ASYLUM FOR THREE YEARS.
ASSANGE HAS AVOIDED EXTRADITION
TO SWEDEN, WHICH HE FEARS COULD
EXTRADITE HIM TO THE U.S., IF HE
WERE CHARGED FOR PUBLISHING A
TROVE OF CLASSIFIED MILITARY AND
DIPLOMATIC DOCUMENTS FIVE YEARS
AGO.
>> Sreenivasan: GOVERNMENTS FROM
EUROPE, AFRICA, AND THE MIDDLE
EAST ARE CALLING FOR ALL SIDES
IN LIBYA'S FOUR YEAR CIVIL WAR
TO AGREE TO A CEASEFIRE.
DELEGATIONS FROM 17 COUNTRIES,
INCLUDING THE UNITED STATES, MET
IN ROME TODAY WITH 15
REPRESENTATIVES OF LIBYAN
FACTIONS.
THEY DISCUSSED A UNITED NATIONS
PLAN TO CREATE A NATIONAL UNITY
GOVERNMENT WITHIN 40 DAYS.
ONE CONCERN IS THE CURRENT POWER
VACUUM COULD BE FILLED BY THE
MILITANT ISLAMIC STATE IN IRAQ
AND SYRIA, OR ISIS, WHOSE
PRESENCE IN LIBYA HAS GROWN
SINCE THE TOPPLING OF MUAMMAR
QADAFFI IN 2011.
REUTERS REPORTER PATRICK MARKEY
HAS BEEN COVERING THE LIBYAN
CONFLICT.
HE JOINS ME NOW BY SKYPE FROM
ALGIERS.
FIRST OF ALL, WHY IS LIBYA SO
CRUCIAL IN THIS AND WHAT STATE
OF GOVERNMENT EXISTS TODAY?
>> YOU KNOW AT THE MOMENT WE
HAVE TWO RIVAL GOVERNMENTS.
ONE IN THE EAST AND ONE IN
TRIPOLI, EACH BACKED BY
DIFFERENT ARMED FACTIONS.
MOAT MOST OF THEM ARE FORMER
REBELS WHO WERE BACK GADHAFI BUT
TURNED AGAINST.
ISLAMIC STATE HAS MANAGED TO
ESTABLISH A FOOTHOLD, MOSTLY IN
THE CITY OF SIRTE BUT OTHER
AREAS OF BENGHAZI.
ITALY IS ONLY 300 KILOMETERS
AWAY FROM LIBYA ACROSS THE
MEDITERRANEAN.
BUT FOR NORTH AFRICAN NEIGHBORS
LIKE TUNISIA, WHO SAW ATTACKS
CARRIED OUT AGAINST ITS TOURISM
INDUSTRY, BY TERRORISM.
THERE IS PRESSURE FOR RESOLUTION
OF THE CRISIS.
>> IN TERMS OF I.S.I.S. THEY
HAVE BEEN ATTACKING OIL FIELDS,
MILITARY CHECKPOINTS, THEY
PRETTY MUCH CONTROL THE CITY OF
SIRTE RIGHT?
THERE RIGHT.
THEY SLOWLY GATHERED THEIR
PRESENCE THERE OVER THE LAST
YEAR OR SO.
THERE WAS THIS ATTACK ON THE
CORINTHIAN HOTEL, AND GROWING
MORE FOREIGN FIGHTERS TO THEIR
BASE THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: WHILE THESE
CONVERSATIONS HAPPENED IN ROME
TO TRY TO GET THESE FACTIONS TO
AGREE, I IMAGINE THERE'S HARD
LINERS INSIDE LIBYA THAT WANT
NOTHING TO DO WITH THIS
AGREEMENT.
CAUGHT IN THE MIDDLE ARE JUST
AVERAGE LIBYAN CITIZENS.
WHAT'S LIFE FOR THEM LIKE NOW IN
THIS STATE OF FLUX?
>> AS YOU SAID YOU KNOW, THERE
ARE TWO GOVERNMENTS.
AND IT IS VERY CHAOTIC.
THERE ARE PROBLEMS WITH
INFLATION, THERE ARE PROBLEMS
WITH SUPPLIES IN PLACE LIKE
TRIPOLI.
KIDNAPPING PROBLEMS, PLACES LIKE
BENGHAZI.
FOR LIBYANS, FOR THE POLITICAL
LEADERS, PEOPLE ARE LOOKING FOR
SOME KIND OF RESOLUTION.
BUT THERE ARE BIG QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE PEOPLE WHO DON'T AGREE
WITH THE AGREEMENT AND CERTAIN
OF THE ARMED GROUPS WHO MAY
RESIST.
SO THERE ARE LOTS OF QUESTIONS
ABOUT WHETHER THIS GOVERNMENT
WILL WORK, WHETHER IT WILL BE
ABLE TO FORM A UNITED FRONT OR
DIFFERENT GROUPS WILL COME TOQUE
AND HOLD A CEASE-FIRE.
WORK TOGETHER AGAINST ISLAMIC
STATE OR AS THEY HAVE IN THE
PAST, FACTIONAL FIGHTING AS IS
THE CASE IN THE THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS.
>> PATRICK MARKEY, THANKS SO
MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: ON ANY GIVEN
NIGHT IN THE UNITED STATES,
THERE ARE 600,000 PEOPLE WHO ARE
HOMELESS, EITHER SLEEPING IN
SHELTERS OR OUTSIDE, ACCORDING
TO FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
STATISTICS, AND THE NUMBER IN
SHELTERS HAS GONE UP OVER THE
PAST TWO YEARS.
A GROWING NUMBER OF CITIES ARE
CRACKING DOWN ON THE HOMELESS
SLEEPING IN THE STREETS OR
OUTSIDE.
ONE OF THEM IS SARASOTA,
FLORIDA, WHERE SLEEPING OUTSIDE
CAN LEAD TO A POLICE CITATION OR
AN ARREST.
A LAWSUIT AGAINST THE CITY
ARGUES THOSE PENALTIES HAVE
EFFECTIVELY CRIMINALIZED
HOMELESSNESS, ESPECIALLY WHEN
THERE MAY NOT BE ENOUGH SHELTER
SPACE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT KARLA
MURTHY LOOKS AT THIS DEBATE IN
TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT, AS
WE CONTINUE OUR ONGOING
REPORTING INITIATIVE CALLED
"CHASING THE DREAM: POVERTY AND
OPPORTUNITY IN AMERICA."
>> Reporter: DAVID CROSS HAS
LIVED ON THE STREETS OF
SARASOTA, FLORIDA, SINCE 2008,
WHEN HE LOST HIS HOME TO
FORECLOSURE.
THE 65-YEAR-OLD FORMER GAS
STATION WORKER NOW SPENDS MOST
OF HIS DAYS AT THE LOCAL
LIBRARY.
>> THE LIBRARY IS A SAFE PLACE.
IT'S AIR CONDITIONED.
YOU DON'T HAVE TO BE BOTHERED BY
THE SO-CALLED RIFF-RAFF.
>> Reporter: ONE NIGHT IN
AUGUST, HE SLEPT OUTSIDE THE
LIBRARY, WHICH HE DID FROM TIME
TO TIME.
WHAT TIME WAS IT WHEN YOU GOT
WOKEN UP BY THE POLICE?
>> ABOUT TEN PAST FOUR IN THE
MORNING.
I WAS SLEEPING RIGHT THERE.
>> Reporter: THE POLICE ISSUED A
TRESPASS WARNING, WHICH WOULD
HAVE BANNED CROSS FROM THE
LIBRARY FOR AN ENTIRE YEAR.
>> I WOULDN'T HAVE KNOWN WHAT TO
DO WITH MYSELF...
>> Reporter: THE REASON SARASOTA
POLICE CITED FOR HIS WARNING WAS
A CITY ORDINANCE AGAINST"
LODGING OUT-OF-DOORS," WHICH
PROHIBITS SLEEPING OR CAMPING
OUTSIDE ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE
PROPERTY WITHOUT PERMISSION.
ACROSS THE COUNTRY, ADVOCATES
SAY A GROWING NUMBER OF CITIES
HAVE BEEN CRIMINALIZING
HOMELESSNESS.
ACCORDING TO A SURVEY BY THE
NATIONAL LAW CENTER ON
HOMELESSNESS AND POVERTY, THE
NUMBER OF CITIES WITH CITY-WIDE
BANS ON CAMPING OR SLEEPING
OUTSIDE HAS INCREASED 50 PERCENT
SINCE 2011.
>> BEING HOMELESS IS NOT A CRIME
IN THIS COUNTRY.
>> Reporter: MICHAEL BARFIELD IS
VICE PRESIDENT OF FLORIDA'S
CHAPTER OF THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION.
IN SEPTEMBER, THE A.C.L.U. SUED
SARASOTA ON BEHALF OF DAVID
CROSS AND OTHERS, ARGUING:"
CRIMINALIZING THE SLEEPING IN A
PUBLIC SPACE WHEN THERE IS NO
PUBLICLY AVAILABLE SHELTER
VIOLATES THE EIGHTH AMENDMENT
PROHIBITION AGAINST CRUEL AND
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT."
THE SUIT ALSO CHALLENGES
SARASOTA'S BAN ON PANHANDLING,
ARGUING THAT IT "CONSTITUTES
SPEECH PROTECTED UNDER THE FIRST
AMENDMENT."
>> THEY GET, ACCUMULATE CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS THAT AFFECT THEIR
ABILITY TO OBTAIN EMPLOYMENT, TO
OBTAIN A VALID DRIVER'S LICENSE.
ALL OF THESE THINGS THAT WOULD
HELP THEM GET OUT OF THE CYCLE
OF CHRONIC HOMELESSNESS, THE
CITY IS USING AS TOOLS THAT KEEP
THEM WITHIN THAT CYCLE.
>> Reporter: SARASOTA IS CALLED"
PARADISE" BY THE PEOPLE WHO
LIVE HERE.
IT'S BECOME ONE OF THE TOP-RATED
PLACES TO RETIRE.
BUT LIKE MANY CITIES AROUND THE
COUNTRY IT'S FOUND ITSELF IN THE
MIDDLE OF A DEBATE FOR HOW TO
TREAT THE GROWING NUMBER OF
PEOPLE HERE LIVING ON THE
STREET.
THERE ARE MORE THAN 300 PEOPLE
IN THE CITY OF SARASOTA
CLASSIFIED AS "CHRONICALLY
HOMELESS," MEANING THEY'VE BEEN
ON THE STREETS FOR MORE THAN A
YEAR.
ALL TOGETHER THERE ARE ABOUT
1,400 HOMELESS PEOPLE IN
SARASOTA COUNTY, AN INCREASE OF
NEARLY 70% SINCE 2009.
AFTER THE LODGING ORDINANCE
PASSED IN 2005, THE NATIONAL
COALITION FOR THE HOMELESS
DECLARED SARASOTA "THE MEANEST
CITY IN THE COUNTRY."
IN 2011, THE CITY REMOVED
BENCHES FROM A PARK POPULAR
AMONG HOMELESS PEOPLE.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO DEAL WITH THE
SITUATION IN THE MOST
HUMANITARIAN WAY THAT WE CAN.
>> Reporter: TOM BARWIN HAS BEEN
THE CITY MANAGER SINCE 2012 AND
SAYS THE "MEANEST CITY" LABEL IS
OUTDATED.
>> AS FAR AS THESE LABELS,
MEANEST CITY X OR Y, I MEAN IT'S
REALLY THE POLICE DEPARTMENTS
AND THE COMMUNITY HAVING VERY
FEW OTHER OPTIONS OR CHOICES TO
TRY TO KEEP THE PEACE.
>> Reporter: POLICE CHIEF
BERNADETTE DIPINO SAYS HER
DEPARTMENT IS RESPONDING TO
CALLS ABOUT THE HOMELESS FROM
THE COMMUNITY.
>> IT WAS AN ISSUE BECAUSE OF
THE COMPLAINTS WE GOT FROM
CITIZENS ABOUT PEOPLE SLEEPING,
AND DOING OTHER THINGS IN THEIR
DOORWAYS, AND PANHANDLING, AND
BEING AGGRESSIVE IN BEGGING FOR
MONEY, AND PEOPLE SOMETIMES ARE
JUST SCARED BY HOMELESS JUST BY
THE WAY THEY SMELL, OR THE WAY
THEY LOOK, OR THE WAY THEY'RE
ACTING, SO WE GET A LOT OF
COMPLAINTS.
>> Reporter: BUT CHIEF DIPINO
SHE SAYS THE CITY HAS ALTERED
ITS APPROACH.
CITATIONS FOR LODGING OUT-OF-
DOORS HAVE FALLEN NEARLY 80
PERCENT SINCE SHE TOOK OVER THE
DEPARTMENT IN 2013.
>> OUR POLICE DEPARTMENT REALLY
SHOULDN'T BE THE FIRST PERSON
DEALING WITH AN INDIVIDUAL
THAT'S HOMELESS, ALTHOUGH WE DO,
BECAUSE WE ARE THE ONES THAT ARE
IN THE STREET, 24 HOURS A DAY,
SEVEN DAYS A WEEK.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR THE
POLICE DEPARTMENT AND THE CITY
CREATED "HOT TEAMS" THAT PAIR
OFFICERS WITH CASEWORKERS TO
CONNECT THE HOMELESS WITH
AVAILABLE SERVICES.
I FOLLOWED A HOT TEAM AS IT
PATROLLED A DENSELY WOODED AREA
ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF SARASOTA,
WHERE A GROUP OF HOMELESS PEOPLE
HAD SET UP AN ILLEGAL
ENCAMPMENT.
INSTEAD OF ISSUING CITATIONS,
THE HOT TEAM PROVIDES
INFORMATION.
>> YOU HAVE OUR CARDS RIGHT
THERE.
RESURRECTION HOUSE.
I'M AT THE HEALTH DEPARTMENT ON
WEDNESDAYS.
>> Reporter: CALVIN COLLINS IS A
HOT TEAM SOCIAL WORKER WHO WORKS
WITH THE HOMELESS ALL OVER THE
CITY.
>> OFTENTIMES, THEY SUFFER FROM
EITHER MENTAL ILLNESS OR
SUBSTANCE ABUSE ISSUES, AND WE
JUST HAVE TO CONTINUE TO
MOTIVATE.
AND MANY OF THESE FOLKS HAVE
SAID, "YOU KNOW, I DON'T WANT
HELP, I'M HAPPY WHERE I AM."
BUT WE HAVE TO CONTINUE TO
ENGAGE THEM AND HOPEFULLY ONE
DAY, THEY'LL WANT TO CHANGE
THEIR SITUATION.
>> Reporter: OFFICER DAVE
DUBENDORF SAYS HOT TEAMS CHECK
UP ON THIS CAMP ABOUT ONCE A
WEEK.
>> THESE GUYS ALL KNOW ME BY
FIRST NAME, I KNOW THEM BY FIRST
NAME.
THEY FEEL VERY TRUSTING, THEY'RE
EASIER AROUND ME.
>> AND THIS GUY IS GOING TO HELP
ME GET OUT OF HERE.
>> YES, SIR.
>> THIS GUY NEEDS TO HELP
HIMSELF GET OUT OF HERE TOO...
>> I KNOW...
>> Reporter: OFFICER DUBENDORF
SAYS THE ANTI-LODGING ORDINANCE
IS JUST A TOOL IN HIS TOOLBOX.
>> SOMETIMES WE NEED THAT TOOL
TO TRY TO DRIVE SOMEBODY TO WANT
TO GET HELP, BECAUSE A LOT OF
THESE GUYS, WE'VE BEEN WORKING
AT IT FOR YEARS AND YEARS.
IF WE CAN USE THAT, IT MAY NOT
BE THE RIGHT THING, BUT YOU KNOW
WHAT, IF IT GETS THEM TO WANT TO
GET BACK UP ON THEIR FEET AND BE
SAFE, I'M ALL FOR IT.
>> Reporter: IN DOWNTOWN
SARASOTA THE HOT TEAM ENGAGES
WITH SOME PEOPLE NEAR THE BUS
STATION, INCLUDING 52-YEAR OLD
DOROTHY MEEHAN.
>> WHAT DO YOU NEED TO GET ALL
THAT STUFF?
>> Reporter: MEEHAN GETS AROUND
IN A WHEELCHAIR SINCE SHE WAS
INJURED IN A HIT AND RUN
ACCIDENT LAST YEAR.
SARASOTA POLICE HAVE ISSUED HER
MORE THAN 50 CITATIONS MOSTLY
FOR MINOR OFFENSES INCLUDING
DRUG POSSESSION AND CARRYING AN
OPEN CONTAINER.
BUT ALSO FOR LODGING OUT-OF-
DOORS AND TRESPASSING.
SHE'S BEEN JAILED A DOZEN TIMES.
>> THE REASONING BEHIND A LOT OF
THE CITY ORDINANCES REALLY HAVE
NOTHING TO DO WITH ANYTHING
CRIMINAL.
IT'S BASICALLY JUST THAT
SOMEBODY DIDN'T WANT TO SEE YOU
THERE.
>> Reporter: LAST MONTH, THE
FLORIDA A.C.L.U. ADDED MEEHAN AS
A PLAINTIFF IN ITS LAWSUIT
CHALLENGING THE POLICY OF
ARRESTING PEOPLE FOR SLEEPING
OUTSIDE.
>> I UNDERSTAND IF IT'S A
NUISANCE, ALRIGHT, YOU'RE MAKING
A BIG MESS, YOU'RE CAUSING A
RUCKUS, OR THERE'S TONS OF
PEOPLE WHERE THEY CAN'T CONTROL
THE SITUATION.
BUT IF I'M SLEEPING BY MYSELF,
I'M SLEEPING, I'M NOT FIGHTING
WITH ANYBODY, I'M CERTAINLY NOT
ARGUING, I'M NOT DRINKING.
I'M SLEEPING.
AND I DON'T SEE WHAT THE CRIME
IS AGAINST THAT.
>> Reporter: WE'VE TALKED TO A
LOT OF HOMELESS PEOPLE HERE IN
SARASOTA, AND SOME HAVE SAID,
WHEN WE MEET THE POLICE THEY ARE
TRYING TO HELP US, AND SOME OF
THEM DON'T FEEL NECESSARILY THAT
WAY, AND FEEL LIKE THEY'RE JUST
MAKING IT A CRIME TO BE
HOMELESS.
WHAT'S GOING ON HERE?
>> I REALLY CAN'T ANSWER THAT,
BECAUSE THE HOMELESS THAT I'VE
HAD DEALINGS WITH, AND THE
INFORMATION THAT I'VE RECEIVED
BACK FROM PEOPLE THAT HAVE GONE
OUT AND TALKED TO THE HOMELESS
IS VERY POSITIVE ABOUT OUR
POLICE DEPARTMENT.
OUR OFFICERS ARE WORKING VERY
HARD TO HAVE RELATIONSHIPS WITH
PEOPLE OUT ON THE STREET AND TRY
TO GET THEM HELP.
>> Reporter: IT SEEMS LIKE THE
CITY HAS REALLY CHANGED THE WAY
THEY'RE DEALING WITH HOMELESS
PEOPLE IN TERMS OF HAVING A
CASEWORKER GO OUT WITH POLICE
OFFICERS.
HAS THAT MADE ANY DIFFERENCE?
>> I THINK IT HAS MADE SOME
DIFFERENCE.
IT IS A POSITIVE SIGN.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, THE CITY
IS USING THIS SORT OF CARROT AND
STICK APPROACH, AND THEY DON'T
HAVE THE RESOURCES TO FULFILL
THE PROMISES THEY MAKE TO PEOPLE
FOR ASSISTANCE.
>> Reporter: WHAT RESOURCES ARE
AVAILABLE FOR THE HOMELESS IN
SARASOTA IS THE CENTER OF THIS
DEBATE.
THERE IS ONLY ONE LARGE HOMELESS
SHELTER IN SARASOTA, WHICH IS
RUN BY THE SALVATION ARMY.
ETHAN FRIZZELL IS IN CHARGE.
>> SO WHAT ARE WE AGAINST?
DRINKING, DRUGGING, AND DYING ON
OUR CORNER.
WHAT ARE WE FOR?
HOUSING!
>> Reporter: THE SHELTER IS
ZONED FOR 260 BEDS, MOST OF
WHICH ARE RESERVED FOR PEOPLE
WHO ENROLL IN SALVATION ARMY
PROGRAMS FOR THINGS LIKE
SUBSTANCE ABUSE AND HELP FINDING
HOUSING.
THERE IS ROOM FOR WALK-INS TO
STAY OVERNIGHT.
MOST STAY ON THESE MATS, WHICH
ARE LAID OUT IN THE CAFETERIA
AFTER DINNER.
SIX BEDS ARE SET ASIDE FOR THE
HOMELESS BROUGHT IN BY THE
POLICE.
>> SO IF THEY'RE DRINKING OR
WHATNOT, THIS, THIS IS FINE.
>> Reporter: THE ORDINANCE SAYS
THAT BEFORE A CITATION OR AN
ARREST IS MADE, A POLICE OFFICER
HAS TO OFFER TO BRING THAT
PERSON TO A SHELTER, WHICH IS
USUALLY THE SALVATION ARMY.
BUT THE FLORIDA A.C.L.U. LAWSUIT
ARGUES THAT THE SHELTER IS AT OR
ABOVE CAPACITY MOST OF THE TIME.
>> YOU EITHER HAVE A SHELTER, OR
YOU DON'T CRIMINALIZE BEHAVIOR
THAT REQUIRES A SHELTER.
>> ARE THERE DAYS THAT WE'RE
VERY FULL?
YES, WE ARE.
BUT IT'S BECAUSE SOME PEOPLE
COME IN ON DAYS OF TERRIBLE
WEATHER OR WHATNOT, BUT THEY
DON'T WANT TO COME INTO ANY
PROGRAM THAT WILL CHANGE THEIR
LIVES OR HELP THEM TO HOUSING.
>> Reporter: TWO YEARS AGO, THE
CITY OF SARASOTA AND THE COUNTY
AGREED TO BUILD A NEW EMERGENCY
SHELTER, BUT OFFICIALS ARE NOW
AT ODDS ABOUT THE SIZE AND
LOCATION OF ANY SHELTER.
THE CITY IS NOW CONSIDERING A
"HOUSING FIRST" APPROACH, A
MODEL THAT'S BEEN USED AROUND
THE COUNTRY.
IT PLACES THE CHRONICALLY
HOMELESS IN PERMANENT APARTMENTS
FIRST AND THEN OFFERS SUPPORT
SERVICES.
SARASOTA ESTIMATES IT WOULD COST
LESS THAN THE $10 MILLION A YEAR
THE COUNTY CURRENTLY SPENDS ON
TREATING OR INCARCERATING THE
HOMELESS.
CITY MANAGER TOM BARWIN SAYS
HE'S CONFIDENT THE CITY'S
ORDINANCES PASS CONSTITUTIONAL
MUSTER AND CALLS THE LAWSUIT A
DISTRACTION THAT MISSES THE
LARGER NATIONAL ISSUE.
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S ADVANCING
ANY SOLUTIONS.
WE'VE GOT THIS HUGE, GAPING HOLE
IN THE MENTAL HEALTH
INFRASTRUCTURE.
THAT'S THE REAL PROBLEM, AND
HERE IN FLORIDA, WE'RE THE
THIRD-MOST POPULATED STATE IN
THE COUNTRY, YET WE'RE 49TH IN
FUNDING MENTAL HEALTH, OKAY.
>> Reporter: DAVID CROSS
APPEALED HIS TRESPASS WARNING
TO THE POLICE AND WON, SO
CROSS CAN STILL HANG OUT
INSIDE THE LIBRARY.
BUT HE STILL WORRIES ABOUT
RUN-INS WITH THE POLICE.
>> THEY'RE DOING EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE TO GET THE HOMELESS
ELEMENT OUT OF THE CITY.
>> Reporter: SO THEN WHY NOT
LEAVE?
>> WHERE AM I GOING TO GO?
IT'S BEAUTIFUL HERE.
I'M 65 YEARS OLD.
YOU COME TO FLORIDA TO RETIRE.
>> Sreenivasan: SEE HOW THE
NUMBER OF CITIES WITH LAWS
PROHIBITING LIVING ON THE
STREET, IN PARKS, OR IN VEHICLES
HAS INCREASED IN THE UNITED
STATES.
VIEW OUR INTERACTIVE MAP AT
pbs.org/newshour.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SUNDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: A LEADING U.S.
GOVERNMENT'S SCIENTIFIC AGENCY,
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
HEALTH, HAS DECIDED THAT IT WILL
NO LONGER ALLOW ITS CHIMPANZEES
TO BE USED FOR BIO-MEDICAL
RESEARCH FOR HUMAN HEALTH.
THE NEWSHOUR'S STEPHEN FEE HAS
MORE.
>> Reporter: AT THIS 200 ACRE
EXPANSE NEAR SHREVEPORT, IN
WESTERN LOUISIANA, CHIMPANZEES
HAVE THE RUN OF THE PLACE.
IT'S CALLED "CHIMP HAVEN"-- A
SORT OF RETIREMENT COMMUNITY FOR
CHIMPANZEES, OUR CLOSEST GENETIC
RELATIVE IN THE ANIMAL KINGDOM.
THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF
HEALTH DECIDED LAST MONTH TO END
ITS SUPPORT FOR BIOMEDICAL
EXPERIMENTS ON CHIMPANZEES, AND
IT WILL SEND THEM HERE TO LIVE
OUT THEIR DAYS.
N.I.H. DIRECTOR FRANCIS COLLINS
SAYS SUCH MEDICAL TESTING IS NO
LONGER NECESSARY.
>> A LOT OF THE THINGS THAT WE
USED TO DEPEND ON CHIMPANZEES OR
OTHER ANIMALS, WE CAN NOW
ACTUALLY DO IN OTHER WAYS THAT
ARE PROBABLY MORE RELIABLE IN
TERMS OF THEIR PREDICTABILITY
ABOUT WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IN A
HUMAN BEING.
>> Reporter: THE N.I.H. BEGAN
WINDING DOWN ITS TESTING ON
CHIMPANZEES TWO YEARS AGO,
KEEPING JUST 50 OF THEM ON
RESERVE.
SINCE THEN, THERE'S BEEN JUST
ONE REQUEST TO USE AN N.I.H.
CHIMP FOR RESEARCH-- AND IT WAS
WITHDRAWN.
SO COLLINS MADE THE DECISION TO
RELEASE THE REMAINING 50
PRIMATES.
>> THOSE CHIMPS WHO PARTICIPATED
IN RESEARCH, WHETHER IT WAS ON
AIDS OR HEPATITIS C, THEY GAVE
US ALL A GIFT BY THE THINGS THAT
WE LEARNED.
BUT SCIENCE HAS MOVED ON.
>> Reporter: ANIMAL WELFARE
GROUPS HAVE LONG PRESSED TO END
THAT TESTING ON CHIMPS.
THE U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE
SERVICE DECIDED IN JUNE TO
CLASSIFY CAPTIVE CHIMPS AS
ENDANGERED, IN ADDITION TO
CHIMPS IN THE WILD.
THE N.I.H. OWNS 491 CHIMPS, AND
183 HAVE ALREADY MOVED TO THE
FEDERALLY-FUNDED CHIMP HAVEN.
THE REST WILL BE RELOCATED HERE
IN THE COMING YEARS, AS FUNDING
AND SPACE PERMIT.
>> FINALLY TONIGHT IN SAUDI
ARABIA, AT LEAST 14 WOMEN HAVE
WON LOCAL COUNCIL SEATS IN THE
FIRST ELECTION IN WHICH WOMEN
COULD VOTE.
ONLY ELECTED IN THE SAUDI
MONARCHY.
AND IN FRANCE THE FAR RIGHT
NATIONAL FRONT PARTY HAS STRUCK
OUT IN REGIONAL ELECTIONS.
AFTER DOING WELL IN THE FIRST
ROUND, THE APPEARED OF MARINE LA
PEN DID NOT DO WELL.
28% OF THE VOTE NATIONWIDE.
FRANCOIS HOLLANDE, AND NICHOLAS
SARKOZY WON 40%.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN, GOOD
NIGHT.